They know what they're doing.
Yeah.
Actually, easy for us to say with the lower gravity,
it's a lot easier to roll.
You could have used this.
Yeah.
And so I was more worried than I led on to director
running at the time.
Jerry expressed it pretty well.
By then, our major problems were bent fenders.
About by the time we flew Apollo 17, we learned how to do it.
And isn't that always just the way?
Let's see.
We have been talking for over two hours.
You're amazingly patient.
We've gone up.
And in many ways touched on not only the first missions,
but the last.
I suggest a couple of three more questions.
And then I'm sure that our panelists would be happy to stay around and visit
individually with a few of you that have one or two questions left.
Let's see.
Somebody who's not asked in the front.
I'm just glad to take a moment to look through the future.
It's always great and we're talking today.
What if you're all opinion is coming?
And that may be a good question to end on.
You want to address it right now.
You want to take one or two others.
And then we'll come back for a prediction of the future.
Good question.
Why don't we take a couple of others and then we'll answer that.
The panel will answer that.
Yes.
I'll ask you a minute.
One, two, three.
Was there any feeling on the part of the flight controllers that procedures left undone
that would be very important to do as we went to Apollo 16 and 17 knowing that those were the last ones?
I'll take a crack it down.
I can't think of anything and I know and I was with it right until the very last.
And I hope this comes out right.
I think by and large, most of us were realistic enough to know that Apollo program couldn't go on forever.
We had pretty much done what we had set out to do.
And besides that, there were guys that were already looking at this wing vehicle call shuttle that would be reusable.
And by the time we flew 17, the first vote in the Congress had already happened, back to happen on 16, where we got the initial funding for the shuttle.
And I think there was at least, and I'm trying to put it in my own context in what other people had to say, I think we were ready to move on.
Psychologically, we would have flown more if they'd lined them up. We'd have continued to do it.
But I think we were ready to go on to the next step.
And I think by the time we got to 17, there wasn't much knew that we could do with the hardware and the capability that we had with Apollo.
And I can't recall anything that was kind of left undone.
And I really was. I know in my own case, I was ready to get out of the control center environment for Juanco do something else.
And that was in December 1972, and I didn't realize it, but in April I was in Washington.
So I didn't intend to go quite that far that fast, but Mr. Kraft took me of my word.
Well, he had people who were...
He was over-helping.
Okay. One other question before the last one?
Okay, in the middle.
The question is, has there been any thought of recording the knowledge that's come from the flight controllers and their co-workers with regard to Apollo and others as we prepare hopefully to do it?
The question is, has there been any thought of recording the knowledge that's come from the flight controllers and their co-workers with regard to Apollo and others as we prepare hopefully to head out to Mars?
And I don't want to hog this thing, but I'll take a minute to have it.
You know, everything we've done in this country, major achievements, technological achievements, we've always stood on the shoulders of those that went before us.
You think of the airplane world or you think of the space world with guys that like Dr. Goddard, he got us started with rockets and bun brown and Chris Kraft and others that were still standing on those people's shoulders today.
I think people like us up here have a responsibility like they did to participate in a proper kind of way as technology goes on.
And here's case we've got this guy still working for NASA and one over there still working for a major contractor for NASA, still involved.
Cliff and I have gone on to private sector duties and Joe Allen over there is making all this money in the commercial space world.
Sorry.
Anyhow, I think that you will see in and without getting too profound here are too philosophical.
I think today we have a better capability to call on people and their talent when we need it and maybe we did even back several years ago.
And I think that will be used.
I would say they'll write on the heels of that and it goes back to something I said in my opening remarks.
I think it's very, very important to excite the younger people, the youth like we did in the 60s.
And I like these kids.
I know my kid was here earlier and I know Glenn's son is in here.
Yeah, there's so much smarter and we were at the same point that I think I don't think we have anything to worry about in terms of finding talent in this country to go to Mars or wherever we want to go.
And I feel very good about it and just turn them loose and let them do it. That's the point.
Good, Jerry. Let me ask you to repeat your question about.
I just want to have a continued panel on this.
You can participate in this.
I was thinking about what is your opinion on where this thing goes wrong.
What kind of kid is the daily of what we're completing with these two barns and everything else.
The question is where is the space program going in the opinion of the panel and on what schedule.
What can we look forward to and Steve, let's start with you at that end.
I'm fair because these other fellows more qualified.
I'm going to I'm going to touch just a piece of it because I think the rest of the panel may have a broader perspective.
Clearly we have space station and work and clearly we're working very hard to that.
I would like to come back from my part to the question that was previously asked and that is how we're going to do it.
I'm struck by how little I knew of what the major issues were in the Apollo program.
When I got here all I worried about was how I was going to design my next display and do my next procedure.
I know there were some very fundamental things going on.
It was a very brilliant man.
We mentioned Simon.
Another man was Dr. Miller who probably allowed us to go to the moon by 1970.
The thing I see now is young people come in and they're not just satisfied to do displays and procedures.
I also want to learn how this program is being put together and how the management of it will be conducted 20 years from now.
That tells me that whatever we choose to do we're going to be able to do it.
I didn't do that and I had come to pour a fort.
They are doing it and I think they're to richer fort and I think a lot of people in the audience are here to learn that sort of thing.
As far as the future clearly if I look back 20 years and say if we are as far as I thought we'd be in 20 years to answer is no.
And why guys you could talk about that from here to the turning.
I would just hope that as a minimum in the next 10 years we keep on the steps we've laid out for ourselves,
which is the next logical step of space station and then exporting that.
I think picking up on what Steve just said there.
I think part of this is brought about by the tremendous difference in communication that we have today that we didn't have 20 years ago.
And our higher education system I think is better and there's a lot of reasons why these younger people think the way they do.
But one is they're better informed.
They have been since they were this tall.
That's good news I think for the space program because I think the young people in the country that have grown up with it and they're coming into young adulthood now are better informed.
And I think they may demand more.
I hope they do and I hope that they will be able to do something we haven't been able to do in the last 20 years and that's.
Bring what I'd call a renewed or a recurring excitement to the to the space effort.
Now that kind of sounds like a downer.
I believe over the last 20 years though we have if you look at the shuttle a tremendous accomplishment.
We have been able to bring it online and yes we had a very tragic halt in that program similar to what we had in Apollo and had a tougher time get it going again but it is going again now.
So we've got to continue the shuttle program successful operation over the next several years and I don't think there's any doubt that that will happen.
I think the Congress is behind that I think the administration in the agency are all in sync.
Space station having some fits and starts getting started and I think the reason although it's approved and all of it's ongoing is that it did not have the strong backing of the administration and the Congress locked on to make it happen.
It survived kind of barely and got started and it's a program that has had to battle extremely hard and at the time when the country is undergoing tremendous financial deficits.
And in a competing arrangements.
I think we need to do a better job in that regard incidentally and this is not easy but we got to do a better job and there is a sign that it's happening of communicating with the American people what the space program is all about.
And I don't mean in a technocrat kind of way I'm talking about shaking up their their emotions and we're seeing a little that around this Apollo 11 celebration.
But then it quickly tends to die out.
If there's a message that I would say that we've to go on now to back to the moon and establish a base or on to Mars or wherever we've got to learn that in the space program where the federal dollar is going to support most of it there will be commercial growth as well but most of it in the near term is going to be federal dollars.
We've got to get down in the trenches and play the way the rest of the country plays that game.
We've always been the fair here boys and the fair here girls on the block. People love NASA. They thought it was doing the right kind of thing and we just almost didn't have to work real hard at it.
Now that's an overstatement to make a point.
But we've got to get down now and play this game politically just like everybody else has played for and they've got some of 200 years of experience on us.
And there's signs that that's happening with congressional clout applied in a way that members of Congress can understand which is generally with political action committees and other kinds of straight talk.
And I believe that the American people, man in the street and the woman on the street clearly support what we do in space and would support more.
But they're going to have to have the politicians and I'm talking about the elected officials and the appointed officials in the executive branch and the members of Congress get that message.
I think we will go on in the next 20 years. So I think your 11 year old son's got a great future.
If he wants to make it in space, we're not going to stop. It's not going to be easy and we're going to have some fits and starts and so forth.
But I think by the time he's ready to step in to one of those consoles over there mission control, he's going to have something to operate and it's going to be a fun time.
Well, I don't know that I can add anything to what what Jared and Steve said.
I had the same question put to me 20 years ago. I think about where you think will be in 20 years and my answer was wrong.
Because we're not there. I would have thought we would already have a space station in orbit.
We did have some call forgotten program called Skylab, which is unfortunate that we weren't able to continue with that.
I tend to agree with Jerry. I think that there will be a space program. I don't think the country can afford not to have a space program.
As far as a schedule, I think that is the that's the rub. I think it's going to be very difficult to get anybody to commit to.
Yes, I want to do this by this time because as soon as they do that, they sort of define the envelope of how many dollars is going to take to do it.
And we saw that in shuttle. For years, we use schedule as reprogramming authority for money. We let schedule slip so we didn't have to spend the money.
I see it being out of the NASA these days. I see it going on with the space station now. It looks to me like they hit it down the same road.
I don't mean that to be discouraging. I think that's that's the environment we're in. And if you don't get to go as fast as you want to go, and I'm sure you won't hardly ever do, keep plugging.
Because I think that we're going to be there. And I think we're going to put that space station up and have a human presence in space from the United States.
Dr. Lank.
I speak to that subject as a space cadet. All of us up here are space cadets. We believe in what we are doing.
We believe it's important to our people in this country. It's probably important just as important everybody on Earth.
I believe the things that we will do in the future, the missions, the kind of purposes that we will have will kind of revolve around sort of two thoughts.
One is we ought to learn how to exploit the space capabilities we have to do everything possible to return a direct benefit to our people here on Earth as soon as we possibly can.
By that, I mean, although it's struggling, I believe in the kind of idea that Joe Allen's company here represents.
That is that there's a way to provide a commercial space platform for the manufacturing of materials in space. That's what I mean by exploitation.
That communications, whether understanding what's going on in our planet, contributing to whatever we could do from space to understanding global pollution solutions perhaps there too.
I think that is something that we can contribute to and we ought to in a substantive way.
I believe also that there will always be an exploration component element of our space cadet outlook in our space program.
By that, I mean, we will build a space station. We will use it as a jumping off base to go back to the moon someday on some schedule.
We will also use the moon to jump off from and go on to someplace else. Perhaps we'll go to Mars from the moon for all I know.
But that those two components of the space program will now continue. If you were to ask anybody up here or ask almost anybody where the space program will be in 100 years, I mean, they, the mind tends to conjure up star trek kind of images about what we could, what we could do in 100 years compared to
compared to where we are today. Wasn't much more than 100 years ago people came here and covered wagons and look, look what we're doing today.
So if you just extrapolate that and say what could we do in 100 years, we could be doing some pretty vast and important things.
And for all I know have a lot of people, very, very many people in the population working and operating in space.
I think that will happen on some schedule that I don't know what it is. But I think the space program is it moves forward today will be exploiting what we're able to do for direct benefit to earth and retaining and building on the exploration component, which I think is an important part of the inspiration that the space program offers.
So for those of you who have to run it, the question was asked before about corporate knowledge, you should learn whatever you can from the experiences of the past and the history and those people who participated in those things.
And you ought to learn what you can for them. But my advice is to take charge of it, get on with it and don't wait for anybody to tell you. It's your program as much as anybody's. So you take charge of it.
Thank you. I'd like to thank the panel. You're a lot better disciplined than I had feared. I did enjoy it. I appreciate it. And please join me in showing your appreciation.
Most of you are late for work.